---
title: "6 Years In - Some Thoughts on Structural Engineering"
categories:
  - Structural-Engineering
---

A few weeks ago someone on the r/structuralengineering subreddit created a post asking about what daily life for structural engineers working in design was like. Below was my response which I am hoping might be useful to other folks curious about the profession. I look forward to revisiting this in another 5 years to see what may have changed.


My daily job includes running calcs, putting together engineering sketches, answering RFIs when stuff doesn’t fit in the field, going out for structural observations, and reviewing shop drawings.

It’s fun work but I am sitting down a lot which I don’t enjoy. Standing desks help a little.

With regards for advice, references, and tips - a similar question was asked yesterday, here was my response:

To improve your skills, I suggest you get familiar with the following:

# Codes

- IBC - specifically chapter 16 on structural design and the chapters that follow which are specific to materials. Remember, codes adopted by IBC are in Chapter 35.

- ASCE 7 - be familiar with Chapters 1-4 for Risk/Building Category, Loads and Load Combinations, and Live Loads. Depending on your location you may need to get familiar with the following Chapters on Ice/Rain loads. Most buildings involve some Seismic and Wind Considerations so be sure to look into Chapters 11, 12, and 13 for Seismic and 26-30 for Wind.

- ACI 318 for Concrete Design.

- AISC 360 for Steel Design. Use AISC 341 for Steel Seismic Design.

- National Design Standards (NDS) for Wood Design. You can view these for FREE on the AWC (American Wood Council) website.

- TMS 402 for Masonry Design.

# Books/References

- Design of Welded Structures by Omer Blodgett - an old but extremely valuable book on the design of steel welded structures. This book is a great value for the price.

- Design of Wood Structures by Donald Breyer. Great general wood design book and also for understanding diaphragms/sub-diaphragms.

- Portland Cement Association has a great companion to ACI 318-11 that also has solved sample problems. Additionally, they publish "Simplified Design of Reinforced Concrete Buildings" which has wonderful illustrations on how concrete and wood framing come together in buildings.

- ACI MNL-66 is a great reference for understanding how concrete is detailed. It will help when putting together engineering sketches.

- Architectural Graphics Standards by Ramsey will give you a decent example of how most things are detailed. It might now be immediately relevant to your engineering analysis work but it's good to be in the mindset of knowing how things come together.

- SEAOC structural/seismic design manuals are excellent for holistic solved examples.

- Roark's Stress and Strains. You might only use it once a year but it's worth the $7. Look for the one at the thrift books website. Doubt you'll find this on Amazon.

- Dynamics of Structures by Chopra. A must if you want to understand seismic.

- Be sure to have a library card or student card that gives you access to an online library. Structural engineering references can be costly and most schools or public facilities have a good collection.

- Check out Dirk Bondy's videos on Youtube if you are more of a visual learner. He is an excellent teacher and at the top of the game in post-tension design.

# Sample Design

- Lots of state municipalities and departments of transportation have sample plans for heavy civil type structures (retaining walls, falsework, possibly even some bridges).

- Building Departments get a lot of laymen coming in making changes to their homes. This leads to typical wood frame construction details on a lot of Building and Safety Department websites. For example, I live in Southern California and this is what a quick google search yields: https://www.burbankca.gov/home/showpublisheddocument?id=53217

- Other than resources you can find by googling, I would definitely encourage you to contact a local structural design firm and ask if you can just come in for a tour.

# General

- Be kind and open when you're starting out. You don't know everything. Everyone knows you don't know everything. No one expects you to design the Burj Khalifa when you start.

- Load path. Load path. Load path.

- Understand mechanics and stresses. Know how to use Mc/I off the top of your head. Know how to calculate the centroid of a shape, the section modulus, and the plastic modulus off the top of your head. Understand what a stress distribution looks like. Where is the tension? Compression? Shear? Flexure? STAAD, RISA, and SAP are just tools. Garbage in, garbage out.

- Read Deep Work by Cal Newport. We tend to practice Deep Work more than most professions.

- Get quick with CAD. Putting together a fast, to scale sketch can be invaluable. CAD is free for students and you can get a library card to give you access to free online tutorials via LinkedIn learning.

- This is an experience-driven field. In 5 years you'll be good. In 10 you'll be great. Make sure you're kind to the new guys. I don't know why a lot of guys who show up to career fairs have a weird arrogance about being engineers.
